GNU Boot 0.1 RC7:
-----------------

We just released GNU Boot 0.1 RC7. Even if this release contains
mostly bug fixes, we still need help from testers as many people are
afraid to install images that are not guaranteed to work.

Beside bug fixes, it also contains many improvements related to the
the manual and website (more in the next sections).

Safety improvements
-------------------

- The GNU/Linux distribution used to build a given releases is now
  documented. This help limit the risk of non-working images if you
  build images yourself (this is also now documented in the manual).

- We found advices that were dangerous for the health and/or that
  could break computers on the GNU Boot website.

  More details are in the following commits:

  - b9a32e655e6 website: warning banner: warn against breaking
    computers.
  
  - 0a511315077 website: warning banner: warn against (potentially)
    unsafe infos.

  It was easier to add a warning banner on the unreviewed pages of the
  website than to try to fix everything. Note that so far, everything
  that is in the GNU Boot manual was reviewed from the start. And we
  also need volunteers to help us review patches to improve the
  quality of the information in the manual.

  Also note that information that can break computers is extremely
  wide spread, in many tutorials of poor quality.

  But it probably also affects in a lesser extent, all or almost all
  the boot software distributions that target laptops and that advise
  to use external flash programmers.

  The risks depend a lot on how the computer design, and the damage
  can also be invisible and reduce the computer lifespan.

  So having instructions that work for a given computer at a given
  time doesn't mean that bad things can't happen.

- It would not be very useful to warn people about risks and offer no
  way to limit these risks. So we also started explaining how to limit
  risks when using external flash programmers.

  The idea is not to be comprehensive and to have information that can
  make using flash programmers 100% safe, but instead to start
  addressing the most common cause of breaking computers first, as
  instructions cannot cover everything and they cannot substitute
  proper training.

  In addition most people probably just want to get the job done with
  minimal risks, and probably cannot dedicate years of training to
  have the smallest risk possible.

GNU Boot manual packages availability
-------------------------------------

In GNU Boot 0.1 RC6 we didn't have what was necessary to package the
manual. It was fixed a few months after the last release. Since then
we started packaging the GNU Boot manual.

It is now available in Parabola[1].

A PureOS / Trisquel package can also be made from the GNU Boot source
code but this is not integrated in PureOS or Trisquel (we don't know
if this is possible or not).

As expected the GNU Boot manual can also be built from GNU Boot source
code, the last version can also be viewed or downloaded in PDF or HTML
from the GNU Boot website, etc.

Why packaging the manual?
-------------------------

The GNU Boot images can be downloaded from GNU and people can easily
verify that they were released by the GNU Boot maintainers.

However, for now, nobody can really verify what's in them, not even
the maintainers, so if you really care about the security
implications, the workaround for now, is to build these images
yourself from the GNU Boot source code, to make the images you built
are as safe as the computer you built them from.

As explained in the manual, not wanting to build the images yourself
is also perfectly fine, as security sometimes have costs. Here the
cost is your time (which is precious), and an increased risk that the
image won't work.

If you want to build images for security reasons, this brings another
problem: how can you make sure that the GNU Boot source code that you
downloaded is really the same than everybody else uses?

The ideal would be to be able to just run 'sudo apt install
gnuboot-manual', and then follow the instruction to authenticate the
source code from the manual. Since these instructions also depend on
Guix you would also need to run 'sudo 'apt install guix' as well.

Not having that option would require users to rely on HTTPS for
security instead, and in general this isn't as secure or as easy as
software provided directly by GNU/Linux distributions.

See below for the status on this goal.

GNU Boot binaries status
------------------------

We also started working on having the same kind of security or better
for the images GNU Boot releases (through reproducible builds and
bootstrapable builds, see the manual for more details) but unlike the
ability to verify the GNU Boot source code this isn't usable yet.

This requires to package the software that GNU Boot reuses in Guix,
and here too having Guix packaged in many GNU/Linux distributions
makes things more secure and way easier.

But getting there is getting more complex than when we started GNU
Boot as the landscape changed.

Guix status
-----------

Around September 2025, Debian removed the Guix package due to a
mismatch between expectations of distributions like Debian (who keeps
the same packages versions in a release, and add security fixes on
top) and Guix which is rolling release (it expect users to use the
latest Guix revision which changes every day).

This removal creates more issues for keeping the PureOS and Trisquel
Guix packages. For instance, once installed, they have security
issues, so users need upgrade Guix by following instructions in recent
versions of the Guix manual to fix that.

Guix is also packaged in Parabola and while keeping it working is a
challenge, it requires less effort than PureOS / Trisquel / Debian, as
Parabola is also rolling release, so we can use the latest Guix
release and apply security fixes on top instead of having to do that
on top of a very old Guix release. But that still requires a lot of
time and effort for a single person.

So we are looking for other Guix contributors interested in this issue
to, together, find a way to have a realistic plan to lower maintenance
cots for distributions like Parabola and enable more rolling releases
distributions to keep up with security fixes.

And this also brings very real benefits: We have work in progress
patches for using the grub-coreboot Guix package in GNU Boot and
preliminary tests did shows that it is possible to get the exact same
GRUB image across different distributions, so in the future we might
take advantage of that to independently verify part of the images and
document how to do that. If done right, this in turn would also
benefit Guix.

We are supposed to do a talk in the Guix@Paris weekly event[2] in
September 2026 to explain the situation as people from Guix are
interested in the topic.

Our focus would also be to involve the audience (that contains Guix
contributors) to find ways to enable people to collaborate to improve
the situation, in a realistic way.

An idea could be to enable people to backport patches, and share the
work, but also, at the same time, making it clear for everybody that
this is done by volunteers and that no one is forced to do that
work.

Other manual and website improvements
-------------------------------------

The documentation (both the website and the manual) contains very
important changes.

- The URL of all the website pages changed in 2025. Before we
  redirected everything to a web/ directory. So
  https://gnu.org/software/gnuboot/web/index.html became
  https://gnu.org/software/gnuboot/index.html . The commit 

  See the commit 89b14d92423 ("website: get rid of web/ prefix.") for
  more details.

- Thanks to collaboration with Leah Rowe, the description of Canoeboot
  was improved a lot.

- Work was done to document which flash programmers work with which
  laptops. We have very few programmers documented but we at least
  have the infrastructure to be able to easily tests with
  programmers. Also note that how to use these programmers isn't
  documented yet in the GNU Boot manual, but as explained before, we
  started documenting safety procedures.

- Some mainboards like the KGPE-D16 should have been marked as
  experimental from the start, due to incomplete Coreboot support. So
  this is now done. See the commit 3759c00384a ("manual: mark fam15h
  mainboards as experimental.") or the manual for more details.

- We also started documenting how to use GNU Boot once installed: what
  partition types it support, how to override the GRUB configuration
  without touching GNU Boot, etc. However this work is not complete
  yet and many patches about it still need to be sent. We for instance
  with GRUB images, we don't have any documentation on the filesystems
  being supported, or on which one are safer to use.

- Work was done to explain how to test GNU Boot with QEMU.

- A section on security was created in the manual. We took time to
  explain what is a threat model because nowadays many people miss
  that and security is often useless, counter-productive and a threat
  to freedom and autonomy without that.

  Beside that we try to explain the consequences for security of some
  common situation with GNU Boot (installing GNU Boot, building it
  yourself or not, etc).

Other changes
-------------

GRUB is now back to using a release (2.14). Previously we had to
update it to fix security issues at a time where no releases were
available with the fixes.

Many less visible changes
-------------------------

In addition to the more visible changes above, we also had many fixes,
code cleanups, or similar improvements to make it easier to maintain
GNU Boot in the long run.

There is also a slow ongoing work to fix copyright notices we
inherited from Libreboot: the information is recorded in various git
repositories anyway, but once a given file is validated, it can easily
be reused by other projects or people without risk of missing
contributors.

A lot of the work also went directly to other projects like Guix,
Trisquel, Parabola, which are not directly visible in GNU Boot.

Events
------

Several events took place since 0.1 RC6:

- GNU Boot participated in the FSF40 hackathon. The FSF news around
  that event have more details.

- Several install parties and/or conferences were made. See the event
  section on the GNU Boot website for more details on these.

Process changes
---------------

- Jordán 'iShareFreedom' / isf is now the responsible for the Spanish
  translations, but since that happened, we didn't really had to deal
  with translations.

Big release
-----------

This release has more than 200 change / commits since the 0.1 RC6
release which was made in March 2025.

References
----------

[1]It is in the gnuboot-manual package, in the pcr repository. Once
   installed, the manual can be viewed with the info command, and also
   in Emacs which is also supposed to be able to display the
   picture(s) available in manuals (the info command can't do that).

   However, in Parabola, with Emacs, pictures aren't displayed in the
   GNU Boot and GNU Guix manual because the pictures are automatically
   compressed during the package compilation. If someone knows how fix
   that, please contact us on the gnuboot-patches mailing list.

[2] The event is not annouced yet, but here's is a link to the last one:
    https://www.agendadulibre.org/events/34902
